2.0 DESCRIPTION OF INCIDENT
2.1 Pre-Incident Events
2.1.1 Furnace Decommissioning and Demolition
The #4 batch furnace in the 160-inch plate mill was shut down in 1992, at which time a
10-inch isolation gate valve was closed to prevent the flow of coke oven gas to the
furnace. This created a 25-foot vertical deadleg8 of 10-inch-diameter piping above the
valve, which was open to the COG distribution piping (Figure 5). Furnace demolition
began in summer 2000.
25 Feet of 10-Inch
Diameter Deadleg Piping
10-Inch Slip Blind
(Installed January 5)
Crack in 10-Inch
Valve (Discovered
January 1)
Figure 5. #4 Batch furnace COG piping.
8A deadleg is a section of piping, typically vertical, without flow. In this case, it was connected to the main
COG piping.
18
Over the Thanksgiving 2000 weekend, the furnace structure was knocked down. Figure
6 shows the resulting rubble pile.
Cracked Valve
Figure 6. #4 Batch furnace debris pile present before incident.
2.1.2 Discovery of Leak, January 1, 2001
On January 1, 2001, around noon, a foreman at the 160-inch plate mill detected a COG
odor in the furnace area. Upon investigating, he determined that gas was leaking from a
large crack in the 10-inch gate valve at the #4 furnace. The foreman contacted the utility
department, which is responsible for the COG distribution system at Burns Harbor. By
4:00 pm, the main 20-inch manual gate valve located on the roof of the plate mill was
closed, which stopped the flow of coke oven gas to the building. The fuel for the
furnaces was switched from coke oven gas to natural gas.
CSB determined that the 10-inch valve likely cracked when water trapped in the deadleg
above the valve froze and expanded. The leak became apparent as the ice thawed.
Although outdoor temperatures remained below freezing for most of December, a
significant warmup in the month allowed for thawing inside the furnace area. It is
19
probable that any liquid in the deadleg drained through the crack before the gas was
detected. As shown in Figure 5, the crack was located at the upper flange of the valve,
above the gate that blocked flow.
2.1.3 Installation of Slip Blind, January 5, 2001
Before the plate mill foreman left work on January 1, he discussed the proposed repairs
with a foreman from the general services department. (This department is a plant-wide
group of approximately 85 employees who supplement maintenance activities in each
operating area.) They determined that the best approach was to remove the cracked 10-
inch valve and replace it with a blind flange fitted with a 1-inch drain valve,9 which
would serve as the drainage point for the 25-foot deadleg.
To safely proceed with the job, the foremen agreed that a purge procedure was required.
At Burns Harbor, a purge procedure is a set of written instructions for preparing a line for
maintenance. Purge procedures are typically written by combustion technicians,10 in
consultation with operations and safety personnel, as necessary. The purge procedure
lists the order for opening and closing specific valves and vents (lockout/tagout) to ensure
that hazardous gases and liquids are vented and drained prior to beginning maintenance
work.
The leaking valve problem was the subject of a meeting of supervisors from the plate mill
and the utility departments between January 2 and 5. The managers decided to install a
slip blind in the flange above the leaking valve (Figure 5) instead of the preferred blind
flange and drain valve assembly. It would have taken additional time to fabricate the
blind flange and drain valve, and the plant wanted to switch more quickly from natural
gas to the less expensive coke oven gas.
9 A blind flange is a solid plate piping component used to close the open end of a pipe.
10 Combustion technicians are responsible for instrumentation and for the equipment that controls and
monitors the fuel gases used at Burns Harbor.
20
On January 5, managers and staff from the 160-inch plate mill and the utility and general
services departments met on the elevated walkway at the valve to discuss installation of
the slip blind. Three millwrights from the general services department were assigned to
the job. They were informed that the main 20-inch COG valve was closed and that coke
oven gas had been vented from the plate mill system piping. The isolation and venting
were done without written pre-job planning, which is required by Burns Harbor
maintenance procedures when hazardous gas might be present.
The millwrights began the work by removing two bolts and checking the flange area for
flammable gases with a combustible gas detector. No hazardous gases were detected.
They then proceeded with the slip blind installation. As they loosened and removed the
remaining bolts, a tar-like residue with a molasses consistency began to ooze from the
flange, hindering installation of the blind. The millwrights hammered the blind into the
flange opening, and then reinstalled and tightened the bolts.
At some time during the following week, a foreman placed a 250-watt infrared heat lamp
near the line, just above the 10-inch valve. The lamp was intended to keep the line warm,
prevent freezing, and thus prevent failure of the piping and the release of additional
material. Heat lamps are one of the devices commonly used at the Burns Harbor facility
to prevent lines from freezing.
2.2 The Incident
On the morning of February 2, 2001, another meeting of management and staff from the
utility and plate mill departments was held at the cracked 10-inch valve to plan the valve
removal job. Personnel discussed the need to drain the line above the blind, but this
could not be done safely with the blind installed. However, they decided to proceed
because they believed that the condensate was nonflammable. Two potential ignition
sources were located in the area when the job began–a natural gas-fired space heater and
the infrared heat lamp.
21
The job was assigned to five general services department millwrights, including two who
had originally installed the slip blind on January 5. Burns Harbor management also
assigned a four-man crew from Onyx Industrial Services to capture COG condensate that
might be released when the line was opened. The crew consisted of two supervisors and
two vacuum truck operators.
At this time, the workers were located as shown in Figure 7. Two millwrights were
balanced on the piping behind the valve, off the walkway. Another millwright was
standing on the walkway. The Onyx supervisor was standing to the side of the valve.
The fourth millwright was working near the end of the walkway, and the fifth millwright
and three of the Onyx personnel were located on the ground.
N Natural Gas Fired
SpaceHeater
Millwrights
Bathroom
Beam
Elevated Walkway
10-Inch Valve
Control
Room
Onyx Supervisor
Millwrights
#4 Furnace Debris Pile
Millwright
Onyx Workers
Crane
Onyx Pickup Truck Onyx Vac Truck
#5 Furnace
Figure 7. Location of personnel at time of release, February 2, 2001.
To begin the work, the millwrights removed the bolts on the bottom side of the valve,
which opened up about 6 inches of space below the valve. They then loosened the bolts
22
on the top flange of the valve, around the slip blind. A small stream of liquid began to
seep from the flange, in addition to black tar-like material; and the valve suddenly
dropped down several inches against the loosened bolts (Figure 8). Flammable
condensate sprayed out and soaked the two millwrights positioned on the piping and the
Onyx supervisor. The condensate ignited. Another millwright observed the flame move
from the north and below him along the wall to the south, toward the valve. As the flame
reached the valve and the now open pipe, there was a blast and flammable liquid sprayed
in all directions.
25 Feet of 10-Inch
Diameter Deadleg Piping
10-Inch Slip Blind
Release of
Flammable
Liquid
Figure 8. #4 Batch furnace COG piping, release of flammable liquid,
February 2, 2001.
The two millwrights on the piping were engulfed in the flames and fell behind the
furnace structure. One of these millwrights died; the other was injured, with burns and
23
contusions. The Onyx supervisor fell off of the east side of the walkway onto the furnace
debris pile and suffered fatal burns. (There was no railing on the east side of the walkway
due to the demolition activities.). The third millwright ran down through the flames
across the debris pile and was seriously burned. The fourth millwright suffered smoke
inhalation as he ran down the stairs through the flames.
24
3.0 ANALYSIS OF INCIDENT
CSB identified four major problem areas in the Burns Harbor 160-inch plate mill that
contributed to the February 2 incident:
(cid:1)(cid:2) Lack of understanding of the condensate’s potential flammability
(cid:1)(cid:2) Maintenance job planning and execution
(cid:1)(cid:2) Condensate composition and removal
(cid:1)(cid:2) Hazard communication and training.
3.1 Condensate Incidents in 160-Inch Plate Mill
Between the time of the initial leak on January 1 and the fire on February 2, three
incidents demonstrated that the amount of condensate in the COG system was unusually
high and that the liquid was not the typical nonflammable composition the workforce had
come to expect. Management did not recognize the relationship between these
condensate problems and the hazards presented by repair of the cracked valve.
3.1.1 Fuel Switchover Problems at #5 Furnace, January 5, 2001
During the evening shift on January 5, after the slip blind was installed, the operators
reopened the main 20-inch COG valve to switch the furnaces from natural gas back to
coke oven gas. After successfully switching the #1 and #2 continuous furnaces and the
#7 batch furnace, the operators made the following entry into their shift log sheet:
“Attempted (twice) to switch #5 furnace over to coke gas, but each time it would not light
and spewed heavy black smoke – filling the mill aisle. Because headers are apparently
filled with water, it was switched back over to natural gas.” This was the first indication
of condensate buildup in the COG piping to the furnaces.
25
3.1.2 Fire at #2 Furnace, January 30, 2001
On January 30, flammable COG condensate reached the burners at the #2 continuous
furnace (located to the north of the demolished #4 furnace), causing a large surge of fire
that escaped from the doors of the furnace. Burning liquid was also observed spewing
from the furnace, and the flames engulfed a walkway. Although Burns Harbor
employees were in the area of the furnace, no one was injured.
In investigating the January 30 incident, Burns Harbor staff determined–prior to February
2–that condensate was not draining to the plate mill’s condensate tank. A section of the
condensate drain lines on the roof of the mill had likely frozen; temperatures had been
below freezing, and approximately 15 feet of insulation was missing from the lines. (The
missing insulation was not discovered until January 31.) Because of these conditions, the
COG piping was likely full of ice, water, and flammable liquid. These conditions were
not communicated by management to the personnel responsible for the planned deadleg
repairs.
3.1.3 Condensate Leakage at #1 Furnace, January 31, 2001
On January 31, millwrights were installing a blind11 in the COG line to isolate the #1
continuous furnace for routine maintenance. About 20 gallons of condensate leaked out.
The millwrights stated that they had never seen this much condensate leak when opening
the flange.
The millwrights who installed the slip blind on January 5 and worked the valve removal
job on February 2 were not aware that excessive amounts of condensate were present in
the COG piping system.
11 The isolation blinds on the COG lines to the furnaces were “spectacle blinds,” which can be pivoted in a
flange. One side of the blank is open, allowing full flow; the other side is solid, preventing flow. Thus,
looking at the portion of the blind that is visible outside the flange allows you to determine the flow
condition inside the piping.
26
3.2 Job Planning
Planning of the maintenance work on both January 5 and February 2 was inadequate, as
discussed in Sections 3.2.1 through 3.2.6.
3.2.1 Deadleg Hazard Control
The cracked valve discovered on January 1 was located at the bottom of a 25-foot-long
vertical deadleg of 10-inch-diameter piping created when the #4 furnace was shut down.
The creation of a pocket where liquid could potentially, accumulate, freeze, and
subsequently crack the valve should have been addressed by removing the deadleg or by
taking steps to eliminate the potential for freezing, such as external heating and
insulation.
3.2.2 Written Purge Procedure
Before doing maintenance work that called for COG line opening, Burns Harbor required
a job-specific purge procedure in accordance with the facility’s Gas Hazard Control
Program. The Burns Harbor Lockout, Blue Flag, and Tag policy was also not followed.
That policy states: “Job pre-planning for work that involves confined space entry,
hazardous gas work, pressure vessel work, piping work, etc., should be detailed in writing
to ensure that proper Lockout, Blue Flag and Tag procedures are followed.” And,
“Comply with Job Safety Analysis, Purge Procedure, etc., when working on steam, gas,
oil, air, acid or water lines and associated equipment. Such equipment must be
neutralized, purged, disconnected, blanked and bled of any excess energy which could
cause injury.”
The January 5 and February 2 jobs were conducted without a written purge procedure.
This decision was made by management and staff based on the mistaken assumption that
the COG condensate was not flammable and thus that the condensate remaining in the
27
line posed no threat to personnel. The requirement to execute a purge procedure was
sometimes waived by operations or maintenance personnel for small jobs or jobs that
were considered to be nonhazardous. However, there was no formal system for
determining when the requirements could be waived.
The National Safety Council recommends: “Before working on a pipeline, shut off the
line, lock and tag the valves, relieve pressure from the section of the line, and drain it.”
(National Safety Council, 1997; p. 117) The Occupational Safety and Health
Administration’s (OSHA) standard for control of hazardous energy (lockout/tagout)
states: “Following the application of lockout or tagout devices to energy isolating
devices, all potentially hazardous stored or residual energy shall be relieved,
disconnected, restrained, and otherwise rendered safe.”12 Although a Burns Harbor blue
flag (a tagout device) was placed on the 20-inch valve on the roof of the plate mill, the
line was not drained.
3.2.3 Installation of Slip Blind
After the COG distribution piping was closed on January 1, the furnaces in the 160-inch
plate mill were switched over to natural gas. Management’s initial plan was to remove
the cracked valve and replace it with a blind flange containing a 1-inch fitting and drain
valve. This would have provided a condensate drainage point. However, on January 5,
management instead decided to install a slip blind into the flange above the cracked
valve.
Installation of a slip blind rather than the blind flange and drain assembly allowed the
mill to more quickly return the furnaces to less expensive COG service.
12 29 CFR 1910.147 (d)(5)(i), Control of Hazardous Energy (Lockout/Tagout).
28
However, the slip blind eliminated the possibility of safely draining liquid that might
accumulate in the deadleg.13 Installation of the blind flange and drain valve would have
provided a way to safely drain the deadleg. The United Kingdom’s Health and Safety
Executive (HSE) states in its book, The Safe Isolation of Plants and Equipment: “Bleeds
and vents allow the safe depressurization of parts of the plant when it has been isolated
and also enable the integrity of isolations to be checked. Inadequate provision of bleeds
or vents may compromise the safety of the isolation.” (HSE, 1997; p. 47)
Managers from the utility and plate mill departments recognized the risk of another line
failure if the deadleg refilled with liquid and refroze. Therefore, they scheduled the
installation of the blind flange and drain assembly for February 2. As an interim measure
to prevent the deadleg from refreezing, an infrared heat lamp was placed next to the 10-
inch piping, just above the blind.
3.2.4 Ignition Sources
There were two potential ignition sources in the area when the job began, though CSB
could not determine which source ignited the fire:
(cid:1)(cid:2) A natural gas-fired space heater was located 28 feet horizontally and 18 feet
below the 10-inch valve. These heaters were used as part of the Burns Harbor
freeze protection program for piping containing water.
13 Burns Harbor personnel briefly considered, but ultimately rejected, the use of a hot tap to drain the
deadleg above the slip blind. Hot tapping is a technique for creating an opening in piping that is in service
by welding a fitting onto the pipe and then cutting or drilling a hole through the welded fitting. Hot tapping
is normally done only when there is sufficient flow in the piping to safely dissipate heat or a sufficient
amount of liquid above the weld point, and when it can be ensured that the piping does not contain a
flammable atmosphere. The line above the dead leg had no flow through it, and there was no way to
ascertain that the contents of the pipe would not ignite.
29
(cid:1)(cid:2) An infrared heat lamp was positioned next to the 10-inch piping, above the
cracked valve. CSB determined that the lamp was on at the time of the
release.
Because the work involved opening a line that potentially contained flammables, job
planning should have included removal of potential ignition sources. Although the Burns
Harbor Gas Hazard Control Program required that representatives from the fire and safety
departments assist in job planning, no one from either department was consulted in
preparing for the maintenance work.
3.2.5 Hazards Created by Demolition Activity
The #4 furnace was shut down in 1992. In summer 2000, mill management decided to
remove the furnace structure. No procedure was written for demolition of the furnace,
and no safety review was conducted to consider the possible hazards created by the
demolition activities.
Over the Thanksgiving 2000 weekend, the mill’s crane was used to knock down the
furnace. Figure 6 shows the resulting rubble pile (for comparison, see the photo of an
operating furnace in Figure 2).
As a result of this destruction, the working area around the cracked valve was hazardous.
The following problems were present on February 2, 2001:
(cid:1)(cid:2) No railing was in place on the east side of the walkway; there was a 6-foot
drop from the walkway to the rubble pile (Figure 9).
(cid:1)(cid:2) Piping from the demolition blocked the stairway landing to the walkway.
(cid:1)(cid:2) The stairway did not connect with the walkway.
These obstructions and lack of handrails made it difficult for workers to escape the area
when the leak and fire started. It is probable that the loss of life and injuries would have
30
been lessened if an easier means of exit was available. The job planning process should
have addressed exit routes.
Cracked Valve
Figure 9. Elevated walkway looking south (note absence of handrail on left side).
3.2.6 Communication of Safety and Maintenance Procedures
Safety information was ineffectively transferred from management to the millwrights and
contractors performing the maintenance work. All communication between the plate mill
and millwright supervisors and between the supervisors and the millwrights and
contractors was verbal. The millwrights and Onyx personnel stated that neither on
January 5 nor February 2 were they informed of any flammables that might be present or
of the previous incidents.
As explained by the National Safety Council and OSHA, good practice includes the use
of safety permits to spell out the safety requirements of maintenance jobs. Safety permits
31
are developed by supervision or authorized individuals and provide details on how a job
is to be done, what hazards are involved, and any other special safety considerations. The
permits are then reviewed with maintenance workers at the job site to ensure that they
understand the scope and hazards of each job. The millwrights performing the work on
January 5 and February 2 received no written instructions.
Had safety permits been written for the jobs, it is likely that the lack of a drain would
have been identified. This would have prompted personnel to look at alternative ways to
set up the work and would likely have prevented the incident or lessened its severity.
The process of preparing and following a safety work permit or a purge procedure would
also have given Burns Harbor staff an opportunity to take other safety measures that
might have prevented the incident or mitigated its consequences, such as removing
sources of ignition, improving egress from the work area, or providing a fire watch with a
charged fire hose.
3.3 Condensate Composition and Removal
3.3.1 Deadleg
When the #4 furnace was shut down in 1992, the 10-inch COG isolation valve leading to
the furnace was closed, which created a 25-foot-long deadleg of vertical piping above the
valve. As explained in Section 2.1.1, a deadleg is a section of piping, typically vertical,
without flow. In a COG piping system, liquids may collect in deadlegs.
CSB determined that the 10-inch valve probably cracked due to the freezing and
expansion of water. The crack was located at the upper flange of the valve, above the
valve gate that blocked flow. After the slip blind was installed on January 5, the deadleg
was still present and provided a site for COG condensate to continue to accumulate.
32
3.3.2 Presence of Flammable Liquids in COG Piping
The coke oven gas leaving the coal chemical unit, at an average temperature of 100oF,
typically contained 10 percent water vapor. As the gas stream passed through the COG
distribution system and the temperature dropped, the water and heavier hydrocarbons
(including benzene, toluene, and xylenes) condensed out of the gas. The condensate
drained from the bottom of the piping and into tanks located along the piping route.
Vacuum trucks periodically emptied the tanks. Figure 3 depicts the normal operation of
condensate drains on the COG line.
In August 1999, millwrights removed insulation from the COG condensate drain lines,
located on the roof of the plate mill, to perform maintenance. The insulation was not
replaced. The winterization program for the plate mill consisted of a checklist of
preventive measures for locations known to be susceptible to freezing, but it did not call
for a survey or inspection to identify other areas that might require or might have lost
freeze protection.
The ambient temperature at the Burns Harbor mill between mid-December and mid-
January was generally below freezing. Around the middle of December 2000, the COG
condensate stopped draining to the tank at the plate mill. Without pipeline insulation, the
water in the condensate probably froze, plugging the drain lines. It is likely that water
then began to build up and freeze in the COG distribution piping. As the water froze,
flammable material remained in the liquid state and floated on top of the water and ice
(Figure 10).
33
14-Inch COG Line to
Batch Furnaces
20-Inch COG Line on
Plate Mill Roof
COG Flow
Drain Line Insulation
COG Flow to Batch
Furnaces Initial Ice Buildup Missing Insulation
COG Drain to
Condensate Tank
Figure 10. Probable flammable liquid buildup scenario-ice formation.
As the liquid/ice level in the COG piping increased, it is likely that the flammable liquid
phase either flowed over the top of it or was entrained with the coke oven gas into the
furnace lines (Figure 11). This flammable liquid carryover probably settled in the lowest
points of the piping, such as the deadleg at the #4 furnace–from which it was
subsequently released and ignited.
34
14-Inch COG Line to Batch
Furnaces
20-Inch COG Line on Plate
Mill Roof
COG Flow
Flammable
Layer
Ice/Water
Layer
Drain Line Insulation
COG Flow to Batch
Furnaces Initial Ice Buildup Missing Insulation
COG Drain to Condensate
Tank
Figure 11. Probable flammable liquid carryover scenario.
There was a previous incident at Burns Harbor of ice buildup in COG condensate lines.
In January 1997, a 72-inch-diameter overhead COG line to the blast furnace failed and
fell to the ground due to the weight of ice in the piping; there was no ignition.
On February 14, 2001, CSB obtained a sample of liquid from the condensate drain at the
#5 batch furnace. Because this drain was last emptied in early January, the sample was
probably similar in composition to the material that was released from the deadleg at the
#4 furnace and ignited on February 2. The sample had a flash point of 29oF.14, 15
14 Flash point is the minimum temperature at which a liquid gives off sufficient vapor to form an ignitable
mixture with air near the surface.
15 The sample contained 22.4 percent benzene, 16.8 percent toluene, 13.7 percent xylenes, and 0.08 percent
water. The specific gravity of the mixture was 0.92. The balance of the sample consisted of heavier
organics, mostly tars.
35
3.3.3 Change in Condensate Removal Rate
Onyx Industrial Services used vacuum trucks to empty the COG condensate tanks. On a
weekly basis, Onyx supplied the utility department with a printed summary of the amount
of condensate withdrawn from each tank each day. However, neither the tanks nor the
vacuum trucks were equipped with level or flow gauges to measure the amount of
material transferred. If no condensate was withdrawn from a tank, the Onyx daily
summary indicated a zero for that vessel.
The condensate tanks were normally emptied several times per week. No condensate was
withdrawn from the plate mill tank from December 11, 2000, until the end of January
2001. However, during the same period, twice the normal amount of condensate was
withdrawn from a condensate tank located along the COG distribution piping upstream of
the plate mill’s tank– indicating that condensate was backing up in the piping behind the
ice buildup. No actions were taken to investigate or correct the problem.
Changes in operating parameters, such as condensate removal rates, should be analyzed
to determine if they might have a significant effect on safety. Management should
compare such data to a previously defined acceptable range and investigate deviations.
By not having accurate data and by not responding to the information that was available,
Burns Harbor missed an opportunity to take corrective action, which could have
prevented the incident on February 2.
3.4 Hazard Communication and Training
The majority of the Bethlehem Steel employees interviewed by CSB did not believe that
COG condensate presented a flammability hazard. Of 11 Burns Harbor supervisors
interviewed by CSB, only four considered COG condensate to be potentially flammable
and one did not know. Eight of 18 hourly employees considered it to be potentially
flammable, and seven did not know. Most of the Onyx Industrial Services personnel
36
interviewed also considered COG condensate to be mostly water. Workers familiar with
the coal chemical area were aware of the potential flammability of the condensate.
Bethlehem Steel employees attended OSHA-required hazard communication training,
which covered the flammability of coke oven gas and the fact that it contained a large
amount of carbon monoxide. However, there was no discussion of the potential
flammability hazards of the condensate.
The Bethlehem Steel MSDS for COG condensate does not mention flammability as a
hazard. It was considered to be normally nonflammable. However, the liquid in the #4
furnace on February 2 was flammable because of the separation of water and flammable
hydrocarbons into layers (as described in Section 3.3.2).
37
4.0 ROOT AND CONTRIBUTING CAUSES
4.1 Root Causes
1. Management systems for the supervision, planning, and execution of
maintenance work were inadequate.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Burns Harbor mill personnel often bypassed the Lockout, Blue Flag, and Tag and
Gas Hazard Control Program procedures when performing COG line maintenance
in the steel handling areas of the facility. Company requirements for written
planning, job setup, and line isolation and purging were not followed on January 5
or February 2.
(cid:1)(cid:2) The work on January 5 and February 2 should not have been scheduled without a
plan to control the hazards created by the potential for flammables and by the lack
of a low point drain in the deadleg.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Personnel performing the work were not made aware of the possible presence of
flammables, nor were they informed of the condensate incidents that occurred
prior to February 2.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Obstructed exit routes due to demolition work on the #4 furnace were not
considered during job planning.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Insulation was not reinstalled after the completion of maintenance work on an
outdoor section of system piping. This allowed water in the COG condensate to
freeze. The freezing blocked drains and led to the accumulation of a flammable
phase in the furnace system.
2. The Burns Harbor facility did not have a system for monitoring and controlling
hazards that could be caused by changes in COG condensate flammability or
accumulation rates.
(cid:1)(cid:2) Changes in the amount of condensate being collected were not taken into account
by management. By not examining or responding to these changes, the facility
missed opportunities to take corrective action, which could have prevented the
February 2 incident.
38
(cid:1)(cid:2) Employees were not generally aware of the potential flammability of COG
condensate under certain operating conditions.
4.2 Contributing Cause
The Burns Harbor facility did not have a program to identify and address
hazards that might be created by decommissioning and demolition operations.
(cid:1)(cid:2) The hazards created by the deadleg were not considered when the #4 furnace was
decommissioned in 1992. The deadleg was not removed or protected from
freezing at that time or when demolition activities began in 2000.
(cid:1)(cid:2) The demolition work resulted in the creation of hazards, such as lack of railings
on the elevated platform and obstructed egress.
39
5.0 RECOMMENDATIONS
Bethlehem Steel Corporation, Burns Harbor Mill
1. Implement a work authorization program that requires higher levels of
management review, approval, and oversight for jobs that present higher levels of
risk, such as opening lines potentially containing flammable liquids where there is
no low point drain. (2001-02-I-IN-R1)
2. Monitor the accumulation and flammability of COG condensate throughout the
mill. Address potentially hazardous changes in condensate accumulation rates
and flammability. (2001-02-I-IN-R2)
3. Survey the mill for deadlegs and implement a program for resolving the hazards.
Develop guidance for plant personnel on the risks of deadlegs and their
prevention. Include deadlegs in plant winterization planning. (2001-02-I-IN-R3)
4. Provide drains at low points in piping to allow for the safe draining of potentially
flammable material. (2001-02-I-IN-R4)
5. Ensure that Burns Harbor and contractor employees are trained with regard to the
potential presence of flammable liquids when working with or opening COG or
condensate piping and equipment. (2001-02-I-IN-R5)
6. Establish procedures to ensure that insulation is replaced when removed for
maintenance. (2001-02-I-IN-R6)
Bethlehem Steel Corporation
1. Conduct periodic audits of work authorization, line and equipment opening,
deadleg management programs, and decommissioning and demolition activities at
40
your steelmaking facilities. Share findings with the workforce. (2001-02-I-IN-
R7)
2. Revise the Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) for COG condensate to highlight
the potential flammability hazard. Ensure that management at your steelmaking
facilities trains employees and informs contractors with regard to the potential
presence of flammable liquids when working with or opening COG condensate
piping and equipment. (2001-02-I-IN-R8)
3. Communicate findings of this report to the workforce and contractors at
Bethlehem Steel’s steelmaking facilities. (2001-02-I-IN-R9)
American Iron and Steel Institute, Association of Iron and Steel Engineers, United
Steelworkers of America, AFL-CIO Building Trades Council
Communicate findings of this report to your membership. (2001-02-I-IN-R10)
By the
U.S. Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board
Gerald V. Poje, Ph.D.
Member
Isadore Rosenthal, Ph.D.
Member
Andrea Kidd Taylor, Dr. P.H.
Member
December 6, 2001
41
6.0 REFERENCES
Health and Safety Executive (HSE), 1997. The Safe Isolation of Plants and
Equipment, Oil Industry Advisory Committee, Norwich, U.K.: HSE Books.
National Safety Council, 1997. Accident Prevention Manual for Business and
Industry, Engineering, and Technology, 19th Edition.
42
Appendix A: Incident Timeline
43